+++
title = "Oh Git!"
draft = true
description = "A few quality of life imporovements for working with commandline git"
+++

Git is a powertool which most folks in the software industry use.

It's the kind of tool, where the users can be classified into:
- **Basic**: are comfortable with `add/commit/push/pull`.
- **Intermediate**: are comfortable with `rebases/cherry-picking/worktree/filter-branch` etc etc.
- **Advanced**: are okay with doing an `octopus merge` with more than 8 source branches.


For me personally, I belong to the bucket which I havent defined (between Basic & Intermediate).  This blog post is a `quality of life improvement` to help with `git` and help you improving your workflow.

Let's start with the basics and move our way gradually up the levels!

## Basics:
A few quality of life improvements before we move ahead on our journey to improve our git workflow.
- Configure Prompt
- Configure Aliases
- Configure Completion

### Configuring the Prompt:
Out of the box the command line git interface is bare. To get a little more context a good idea is to configure the [PS1](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Bash/Prompt_customization#Prompts) of your terminal.

A git repo on the terminal without a custom PS1:
``` bash
[mfrw@archlinux mfrw.github.io]$ ls
config.toml content public sass static templates
[mfrw@archlinux mfrw.github.io]$
```

The same repo after some fancy [PS1](https://github.com/mfrw/dotfiles/blob/msft/starship.toml) configuration:
```bash
mfrw in archlinux in ~/os/mfrw.github.io on  master:origin/master
fsh ❯ ls
config.toml content public sass static templates
mfrw in archlinux in ~/os/mfrw.github.io on  master:origin/master
fsh ❯
```

There are mulitple ways to configure the PS1 for your choice of the `$SHELL`, but I use multiple shells on the differnt machines I have. Some machines are configured to use the [fish](https://fishshell.com/) some have [zsh](insert-link) and the remaining are [bash](insert-link).
I also, like to have a coherent experience across all my devices and the cognitive load of not writing and maintaining multiple PS1 scripts for differnt non-compatible shells, I use [startship](https://starship.rs/).
startship is a fast, cross shell and infinitely customizeable prompt for any `$SHELL`.

<figure class="video_container" align=center>
<video controls="true" width=70% source src="https://starship.rs/demo.webm" type="video/webm">
</video>
<figcaption>Starship Demo</figcaption>
</figure>

A quick start for starship can be found [here](https://starship.rs/#quick-install). My starship configuration can be found [here](https://github.com/mfrw/dotfiles/blob/msft/starship.toml).
Once we have configured the prompt to our hearts content, it becomes becomes hard to work on a branch which we are not supposed to. The visual clues make it difficult.

### Configure Aliases
Out of the box git comes with verbose subcommands to do stuff. While I am fan of a good naming convention, if we have a repeated workflow, typing the same tedious commands again and again might cause us to fat-finger and loose our rythm.
Git can be configured extensively (like any other self respecting unix tool).
Let's setup some aliases for the most common git sub commands.

Here is my `.gitconfig` where I have created aliases for the most common commands I use with git.

```.gitconfig
[alias]
  br = branch -vv #display each branch & the commit it is on
  ch = status -uno #only show changed files
  ci = commit -s # commit with --signoff
  cl = clone
  co = checkout
  contributors = !git log --format=format:"%an" | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn
  d  = diff
  dc = diff --cached # diff with the index
  dump = cat-file -p
  fo = fetch origin
  fa = fetch --all --tags
  hist = log --pretty=format:\"%h %ad | %s%d [%an]\" --graph --date=short
  lga = log --oneline --graph --all --decorate #show a graphical lineage of all branches
  lo = log --oneline
  pfl = push --force-with-lease #should rename it to 'please'
  pd = push --delete
  pur = pull --rebase
  recent = branch -a --sort=-committerdate
  revert = revert -s
  st = status
  type = cat-file -t
  unstage = reset HEAD --
  rup = remote update --prune #delete stale references and sync with remote
```
